the sign had appeared overnight. on billboards and trees and the backs of the bus-stop benches. it hung in the window of woolworth’s. it hung by the entrance to the ymca. it was stapled to the door of the municipal court and nailed, at eye level, to every telephone pole along university avenue. the woman was returning a book to the library when she saw the sign in a post office window. it was a sunny day in berkeley in the spring of 1942 and she was wearing new glasses and could see everything clearly for the first time in weeks. she no longer had to squint but she squinted out of habit anyway. she read the sign from top to bottom and then, still squinting, she took out a pen and read the sign from top to bottom again. the print was small and dark. some of it was tiny. she wrote down a few words on the back of a bank receipt, then turned around and went home and began to pack.nnwhen the overdue notice from the library arrived in the mail nine days later she still had not finished packing. the children had just left for school and boxes and suitcases were scattered across the floor of the house. she tossed the envelope into the nearest suitcase and walked out the door.nnoutside the sun was warm and the palm fronds were clacking idly against the side of the house. she pulled on her white silk gloves and began to walk east on ashby. she crossed california street and bought several bars of lux soap and a large jar of face cream at the rumford pharmacy. she passed the thrift shop and the boarded-up grocery but saw no one she knew on the sidewalk. at the newsstand on the corner of grove she bought a copy of the berkeley gazette. she scanned the headlines quickly. the burma road had been severed and one of the dionne quintuplets—yvonne—was still recovering from an ear operation. sugar rationing would begin on tuesday. she folded the paper in half but was careful not to let the ink darken her gloves.nnat lundy’s hardware she stopped and looked at the display of victory garden shovels in the window. they were well-made shovels with sturdy metal handles and she thought, for a moment, of buying one—the price was right and she did not like to pass up a bargain. then she remembered that she already had a shovel at home in the shed. in fact, she had two. she did not need a third. she smoothed down her dress and went into the store.